## Project 3: Harvest Project
The goal of this project was to create a product that will allow farmers to track multiple metrics with ease. My plan is to construct a relational database with MySQL that will flow into a Tableau dashboard. Though not currently part of this project, I am formatting the database to allow simple data entry by employees in different roles. 

1. I started by making a *[plan](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YyngyRyTgFPxvGVLCq6RIbK8hzeYZ-8hVMB1OoWBJCQ/edit?usp=sharing)* for what I wanted available of the dashboard.  Next I organized the tables that would make up my database and *[visualized](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1PRz3RgTxUNtSMZVTSvkq5MRsYyyzI8XInMlv0Mt_sxc/edit?usp=sharing)* how they would connect to one another. Having a plan, I was ready to move forward to MySQL and start building the database.
2. Establishing the [database](https://github.com/JamesWheeler4/James_Portfolio/blob/main/Proj_3%20Harvest%20tracking%20tool/Harvest%20DB.md) for this project went smoothly. I entered test data so I could see the functions of the relations once completed. Next connected the tables via primary keys and foreign keys.
3. I began writing and testing [queries](https://github.com/JamesWheeler4/James_Portfolio/blob/main/Proj_3%20Harvest%20tracking%20tool/Harvest%20Queries.md) to output the metrics that will be used in Tableau. Once confirming values from direct SQL outputs, I started to translate these metrics to calculated value equations in Tableau. The outcome of these can be seen in this [visualization](https://github.com/JamesWheeler4/James_Portfolio/blob/main/Proj_3%20Harvest%20tracking%20tool/Harvest_dashboard_2021.png) which is updated live from the'harvest_project' MySQL database that I had created.
4. I will not currently be moving forward with the web development necessary to build the front end data entry of this project. I believe that I've structured the database to easily accept the addition of a data entry front end. 
